How to Make Chocolate Cheesecake 

A chocolate cookie crust getting made in a food processor.

1. Heat oven to 350F. Add the chocolate sandwich cookies to a food processor and pulse until pulverized. If you’re not using a food processor just place in a plastic bag and crush with a rolling pin. 

2. Pour the melted butter into the processor while pulsing, remove blade and mix with a spatula. If you’re making this by hand then miix the crumbs and butter in a bowl using a spatula.

Chocolate ganache gettingmade with chocolate chips and hot coffee.

3. Transfer the crumbs to a springform pan. I’m using an 8″ but a 9″ fan will work for this recipe too. Use your spatula to distribute the crumbs then press down with a measuring cup or glass. The crust can come up the side a bit but does not need to, it’s really just a base. Bake the crust at 350F for 10 minutes then set aside.

4. While the crust bakes make your chocolate ganache. Add the chocolate chips (I’m using a combination of semi-sweet chocolate and bittersweet chocolate chips) to a bowl then pour in the hot coffee and mix a bit. Much of the chocolate will melt but you’ll need to give it a few short pulses in the microwave to warm a bit more. Cover and set aside for a few minutes then mix together until completely melted or nearly so. Set aside to cool while you make the rest of the filling.

Cream cheesee and sugar getting beaten ffor a chocolate cheesecake.

5. Add the ROOM TEMPERATURE cream cheese to the bowl of your stand mixer fitted with a paddle attachment. If it seems a tiny bit firm then cream it for a few seconds. Pour in the sugar and beat on low for about two minutes or until the sugar is incorporated. Add the sour cream and mix once more. You can of course make this batter with an electric hand mixer and a large bowl if not using a stand mixer.

6. Scrape the mixing bowl down then sift in the flour. You can sift in a tablespoon then run the mixer on low and sift in the rest as it’s going. This helps to not get lumps but in a pinch you can just sprinkle it in as it runs.

Eggs and chocolate getting added to a mixer with cream cheese and sugar for chocolate cheesecake batter.

7. While the mixer runs on low tip in the vanilla then add the eggs one at a time giving a few seconds for the previous egg to add in before mixing in the next. 

8. Pour in the melted chocolate mixture while the mixer runs on low or you can add it all in at once if it’s a bit unwieldy for you. 

Chocolate cheesecake batter getting poured into a springform pan.

9. Scrape the bowl down and give a final mix to work in any bits that haven’t incorporated yet. Your batter should be a uniform color and fairly smooth.

10. Transfer the chocolate filling to your prepared pan and give it a jiggle to smooth things out. You can also use a spatula but this will self-level in the oven so don’t go too far. Place your cake on a baking pan for ease of carrying then bake at 325F for 20 minutes. Afterwards lower temperature to 300F and bake an additional 30 minutes or until the center is just a bit wobbly when gently giggled. Turn oven off and crack the door open. Allow to cool for an hour before removing; cake can cool on counter until close to room temp. Chill overnight.

Chocolae cheesecake getting topped with ganache and whipped cream.

11. Make the chocolate ganache by melting the chocolate and cream. Spread over your cake and smooth with a spatula. 

12. Whip the cold cream with powdered sugar, vanilla extract and sifted cocoa powder. Once soft peaks form transfer to a piping bag fitted with a star tip and pipe the border using small circular motions. The cake is ready to serve!

A top down photo of a chocolate cheesecake with a piece removed and on a plate next to it.
Pro Tips for this recipe

    Start off with really room temperature cream cheese. Leave it out the night before or zap it in the microwave for 20 seconds at 50% power. If the cream cheese is too firm the batter will not be smooth.
    Beat the cream cheese and sugars until completely smooth.
    Slow and steady wins the race for a nice smooth uncracked cheesecake. Bake at a low temp for longer and yes you can bake in a water bath.
    If you’re a chocolate lover but not a coffee fan then melt your chocolate with an equal amount of milk, cream, or water instead.
    Don’t be frightened if your cheesecake seems underdone after an hour of baking, it will firm up.
    When you wrap the cheesecake up, have a piece of paper towel under the plastic or foil. This will absorb condensation and your surface will be unmarred by water droplets.
